<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Dramatis Personae</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="dramatis-personae" epub:type="z3998:dramatis-personae">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Dramatis Personae</h2>
			<p>Period, 1660⁠–⁠1671</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span>, King of France.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Maria Theresa, his queen and Infante of Spain.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Anne of Austria, the Queen Mother.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Gaston of Orléans, uncle of the King.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Duchesse d’Orléans.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Philippe, Duc d’Anjoy, brother of the king, afterwards Duc d’Orléans.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Henrietta of England, his wife.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Cardinal Mazarin.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Bernouin, his valet.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Brienne, his secretary.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><abbr>M.</abbr> le Duc de Beaufort.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Prince de Condé.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Chavalier de Lorraine, favorite of Philippe d’Orléans.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Comte de Sainte-Aignan, attending on the king.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Mademoiselle Marie de Mancini, niece of Cardinal Marzarin.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p class="group">Maids of Honor to Henrietta, Duchesse d’Orléans</p>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>Mademoiselle Aure de Montalais.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Mademoiselle Athenaise de Tonnay-Charente, afterwards Madame de Montespan.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Mademoiselle Louis de La Vallière</p>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>La Molina, Anne of Austria’s Spanish nurse.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p class="group">Ladies of the French Court</p>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>Duchesse de Chevreuse.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Madame de Motteville.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Madame de Navailles.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Mademoiselle de Châtillon.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Comtesse de Soissons.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Mademoiselle Arnoux.</p>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Louise de Kéroualle, afterwards Duchess of Portsmouth.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Maréchal Grammont</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Comte de Guiche, his son, in love with Madame Henrietta.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><abbr>M.</abbr> de Manicamp, friend of the Comte de Guiche.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><abbr>M.</abbr> de Malicorne, in love with Mademoiselle de Montalais.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><abbr>M.</abbr> d’Artagnan, Lieutenant, afterwards Captain, of the King’s Musketeers.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Comte de la Fère (Athos).</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Raoul, Vicomte de Bragelonne, his son.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><abbr>M.</abbr> d’Herblay, afterwards Bishop of Vannes, General of the Order of Jesuits, and Duc d’Alaméda (Aramis).</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Baron du Vallon de Bracieux de Pierrefonds (Porthos).</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Jean Poquelin de Molière.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Vicomte de Wardes.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><abbr>M.</abbr> de Villeroy.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><abbr>M.</abbr> de Foquet, Superintendent of Finance.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Madame Foquet, his wife.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Messieurs Lyonne and Letellier, Foquet’s associates in the ministry.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Marquise de Bellière, in love with Foquet.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p class="group">Friends of Foquet</p>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p><abbr>M.</abbr> de la Fontaine.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p><abbr>M.</abbr> Gourville.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p><abbr>M.</abbr> Pellisson.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p><abbr>M.</abbr> Conrart.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p><abbr>M.</abbr> Loret.</p>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>L’Abbé Foquet, brother of the Superintendent.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><abbr>M.</abbr> Vanel, a Councillor of Parliament, afterwards Procureur-Général.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Marguerite Vanel, his wife, a rival of la Marquise de la Bellière.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><abbr>M.</abbr> de Saint-Remy, maître hotel to Gaston of Orléans.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Madame de Saint-Remy, his wife.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Jean-Baptiste Colbert, Intendant of Finance, afterwards Prime Minister.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Messieurs d’Infreville, Destouches, and Forant, in Colbert’s service.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Messieurs Breteuil, Marin, and Havard, colleagues of Colbert.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Messieurs d’Eymeris, Lyodot, and Vanin, Farmers-General.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Seldon, a prisoner at the Bastille.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>No. 3, Bertaudière, afterwards “The Iron Mask.”</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><abbr>M.</abbr> de Saint-Mars, Governor of Ile Sainte Marguerite.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>A Franciscan Friar, General of the Order of Jesuits.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p class="group">Jesuits</p>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>Baron von Wostpur.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Monseigneur Herrebia.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Meinheer Bonstett.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Signor Marini.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Lord MacCumnor.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Grisart, a physician.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Louis Constant de Pressigny, Captain of the King’s Frigate <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Pomona</i>.</p>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><abbr>M.</abbr> de Gesvres, Captain of the King’s Guards.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><abbr>M.</abbr> de Biscarrat, an officer of the King’s Guards.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><abbr>M.</abbr> de Friedrich, an officer of the Swiss Guards.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Messire Jean Percerin, the King’s tailor.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><abbr>M.</abbr> Valot, the King’s physician.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Planchet, a confectioner in the Rue des Lombards, former servant of d’Artagnan.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Madame Gechter, his housekeeper.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Daddy Célestin, Planchet’s servant.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Bazin, servant to <abbr>M.</abbr> d’Herblay.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Grimaud, and old servant of Athos.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Mousqueton, servant of Porthos.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Blasois, servant to Athos.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Olivain, servant of Vicomte de Bragelonne.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>In the service of Foquet.</p>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>Jupenet, a printer.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Gétard, an architect.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Danicamp.</p>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Menneville, an adventurer.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><abbr>M.</abbr> Lebrun, painter.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><abbr>M.</abbr> Faucheux, a goldsmith.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Vatel, Foquet’s steward.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Toby, one of Foquet’s servants.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Yves, a sailor.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Keyser, a Dutch fisherman.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Maître Cropolé, of the hostelry of the Medici at Blois.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Pitrino, his assistant.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Madame Cropolé.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Landlord of the Beau Paon Hotel.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Superior of the Carmelite Convent at Chaillot.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Guénaud, Mazarin’s physician.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The Théatin Father, the Cardinal’s spiritual director.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p class="group">English</p>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>Charles II, King of England.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Parry, his servant.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>General Monk, afterwards Duke of Albermarle.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Digby, his aide-de-camp.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>General Lambert.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>James, Duke of York, brother of Charles II.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>George Villiers, Duke of Buckingham.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Lord Rochester.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Duke of Norfolk.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Miss Mary Grafton.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Miss Stewart.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Host of the Stag’s Horn tavern.</p>
						</li>
					</ul>
				</li>
			</ul>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
